Various studies show the positive effects of prison recreation. An observation in Australia shows that increased exercise decreased inmates’ feelings of hopelessness . An experiment in Italian prisons showed that supervised physical activity improved the fitness and health of inmates. The book, Sport in Prison, also explores the benefits of regular physical activity and states that participation in sport, in addition to its health benefits, may decrease inmates’ opportunities to engage in deviant behavior by providing virtuous forms of socialization, excitement and risk.

RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES 



1. Recreational activities in prison have proven to boost the self-esteem of inmates, which is a psychological benefit. Active participation in a sporting activity can be all a male prisoner needs to feel masculine. Therefore, recreation helps inmates develop and sustain positive self-esteem.

 

 2. An amazing benefit of these extracurricular activities is that it occupies the prisoners’ time, positively. A prisoner will always devise means to cure his boredom. So, by providing them with constructive recreational activities, they can be productive with that time, or else, there is the risk of having other negative things occupy their minds. Remember what they say about an idle mind?


 





3. It helps to alleviate the rate of recidivism. When you put all the benefits of recreation into consideration, they collectively influence a prisoner's effective release. This will ultimately result in a good recreation skill, a better relationship with family, more outlets for letting out negative energy and emotions, and improved leadership skills.

 

4. Extracurricular activities help to ensure that inmates maintain good health. Physical exercise and gym sessions help the prisoners to achieve a healthy body and state of mind in a seemingly unhealthy environment. The benefits of these activities include providing alternatives to addiction, improved health conditions for older prisoners, and a great body structure for the guys.



 



5. Prisoners acquire new skill sets from extracurricular activities. This is a way to ensure that prisoners attain stability and work on becoming rehabilitated. These are not just vocational skills, but soft skills like collaboration, loyalty, service, and interpersonal skills. In addition to these, inmates pick up vocational skills that they can leverage to employ or self-employ themselves when they leave prison.



6. On the other hand, extracurricular activities allow prison officers to study and gain information about the prison environment. This means that officers can observe the inmates during the activities and draw logical inferences as it regards to brotherhood, leadership, and loyalty within the inmates' rank.


 


7. Finally, recreation helps inmates to release "pent-up" feelings enabling them to handle pressure and frustrations more positively and productively. Active participation in recreational activities in prisons is the perfect platform for prisoners to let off steam and effectively handle the pressures that come with incarceration.


